[h1]Crashes when launched through Steam[/h1]
The most common cause for this problem is that the Quake engine you're using doesn't play nicely with the Steam community overlay.

If you're trying to launch the original Quake (WinQuake) or QuakeWorld program, this probably isn't the issue, since they don't support the overlay anyway. But for GLQuake or GLQuakeWorld, or a modern Quake engine, the overlay could be the problem. In your Steam client, open the properties dialog for Quake and disable the overlay. See if that fixes things.

Note that most of the time it's quite possible to use the Steam community overlay with a Quake engine, it's just that sometimes it causes problems on some systems.

Most commonly it seems to be an old version of DarkPlaces that experiences this issue. If you are using the "Ultimate Quake Patch", then you have an old version of DarkPlaces, and you should probably consider updating to a more recent version. See the section on the DarkPlaces engine in the Quake Engines guide.
[list]
[/list]
[h1]Startup fails with an error dialog about "gfx.wad"[/h1]
If you get an error that specifically says "W_LoadWadFile: couldn't load gfx.wad : can't find pak0.pak", this means that something is wrong with the way your Quake files are arranged. Specifically, the Quake engine can't find the "pak0.pak" file.

The pak0.pak and pak1.pak files are in the "id1" folder. A Quake engine will look for the id1 folder in the current working directory. That directory will normally will be the place where the Quake engine program is located, especially if you are launching Quake by clicking on an icon or button; so, normally you want the id1 folder to be located next to your Quake program. If id1 isn't the right directory, or the pak files aren't inside id1, you'll get this error message.

If you need to make the Quake engine look for the id1 folder somewhere else, you can use the "-basedir" command-line argument as described in the Quake Engines guide.
[list]
[/list]
[h1]Startup fails with an error dialog about "Hunk_Alloc" or "Z_Malloc"[/h1]
If you're running a mod or an addon map, or you're using large custom config scripts, some Quake engines (including the original ones) may need command-line arguments telling them to reserve more memory. See the "Limits" section of the Quake Owner's Manual guide, as well as the "Command Line Examples" at the end of the guide. ("Hunk_Alloc" errors mean you need a larger heapsize value, and "Z_Malloc" errors mean you need a larger zone value.)

Whenever you run downloaded content, be sure to check the readme file to see if it requires special command-line arguments or other settings.
[list]
[/list]
[h1]Startup fails with an error dialog about "unrecognized protocol number"[/h1]
An error like "Host_Error: CL_ParseServerInfo: Server is unrecognized protocol number" is a complaint from Quake client code that it is getting unexpected stuff from a Quake server... i.e. that the server is a different version or variety of Quake from the client. Somewhat surprisingly, this error can happen in singleplayer too. This is because the playback of demos (game recordings) is handled through the multiplayer client code.

When you start Quake it may automatically begin to play some demos. Quake shipped with a few of these demos, which you're probably really familiar with. If you're trying to play a mod, then that mod may include some different demos to autoplay. And it may be the case that those demos were originally recorded in a way that is incompatible with the Quake engine that you're using.

If this error happens when you're trying to launch Quake with a mod, the first thing to do is to check the mod's documentation (README file, or whatever) to see which Quake engine is recommended for playing the mod.

If you're determined to use a non-recommended Quake engine -- or if you're using the right one and the error is still happening -- then you'll need to skip the autoplay demos. One practical way to do this is to use a command-line argument to launch Quake directly into a map. For example if the mod has a "start" map (start.bsp), you could use the command-line argument "+map start" to go directly to that map without playing the demos. The mod's documentation should tell you which map to start with.
[list]
[/list]
[h1]GLQuake/GLQuakeWorld crashes on startup (and disabling the overlay doesn't help)[/h1]
The version of GLQuake distributed through Steam, version 0.95, is a little crashier than later versions. This can be fixed (sometimes) by making sure you have exactly the right command-line arguments for your video settings, but a better solution is to get GLQuake version 0.98 (Windows users only). See the "GLQuake Version Issues" section of the Quake Owner's Manual guide.

The original GLQuake/GLQuakeWorld also may crash if your video card driver is not configured to enable an "extension limit" (for OpenGL extensions) when running those programs. Sometimes this option is visible in the per-program settings in your driver's control panel; sometimes it isn't though, depending on the driver version. For example, at the time of writing this the NVIDIA control panel does not expose this setting, and you have to use some other tool like NVIDIA Inspector to access it.

Fortunately modern driver software should enable this extension limit option for all the original Quake engines. However be aware that driver software uses the name of the program file to figure out whether to apply its pre-baked settings. So for example if you rename Glquake.exe to Foo.exe, the driver software will not apply the extension limit when you run Foo.exe.

A final common problem (although less common with Steam Quake setups) is having an opengl32.dll file in the Quake folder. This library file enabled running GLQuake with old video cards from 3dfx, through the Glide API used by 3dfx drivers. Unless you are using actual 3dfx hardware or Glide emulation, then you don't want to have this library file getting in the way. It will prevent GLQuake/GLQuakeWorld from properly using modern video card drivers. For that matter, opengl32.dll will cause problems for [i]any[/i] 32-bit Quake program that uses OpenGL.

(Note that if you are a user of the GOG distribution of Quake, its setup for GLQuake does use opengl32.dll along with Glide emulation via nGlide. Perhaps GOG was worried about the extension-limit issue. If you don't want to use Glide emulation for GLQuake or other 32-bit Quake programs, then remove that opengl32.dll file.)
